feat(navigator): extend detect and avoid module to follow regulatory standards such as ASTM F3442 (#26815)
PX4/PX4-Autopilot: docs/en/advanced_features/detect_and_avoid.md

# Detect and Avoid

The Detect and Avoid (DAA) module monitors traffic from [`transponder_report`](../msg_docs/TransponderReport.md), evaluates conflict severity, and can warn, change navigator mode, or block arming when a conflict requires an automatic response.

## Overview

DAA supports two conflict models:

> - `Crosstrack` mode raises one conflict level when ownship is close to the traffic's predicted track, vertically close, and within a configured collision-time threshold.

Author: Defined ownship as the current vehicle in the docs. Did not change the variables because ownship is the correct term e.g. see existing code using it: `mxs_state.treq.ownship`

# Detect and Avoid

> The Detect and Avoid (DAA) module evaluates cooperative traffic reported through [`transponder_report`](../msg_docs/TransponderReport.md).

Reviewer: Is it a module? Or a library, or what? If it is a module, good to link to the module - see modules in https://docs.px4.io/main/en/modules/modules_system#sensors

Author: Clarified everywhere in the docs: 

_Detect and Avoid (DAA) is implemented as the `detect_and_avoid` library and runs inside the [`navigator`](../modules/modules_controller.md#navigator) module.
It evaluates cooperative ("transponder-equipped") traffic, such as that from ADS-B, FLARM, or UTM integrations, that is reported through the [`transponder_report`](../msg_docs/TransponderReport.md) topic._

> # Detect and Avoid

Reviewer: @JonasPerolini I have now read my way through this and made some relatively minor edits and a few comments. It is very impressive documentation. Thank you. Next I will look at the user-facing entry point. Tomorrow.

| `ORBIT`, `AUTO_LOITER`                                                                | `POSITION_HOLD_MODE`  | Only `Return`, `Land`, or `Terminate` can escalate |
| `AUTO_RTL`                                                                            | `RETURN_MODE`         | Only `Land` or `Terminate` can escalate            |
| `AUTO_LAND`, `DESCEND`, `AUTO_PRECLAND`, `MANUAL`, `ALTCTL`, `POSCTL`, `ACRO`, `STAB` | `LAND_MODE`           | Only `Terminate` can escalate                      |
| `TERMINATION`                                                                         | `TERMINATE`           | No stronger DAA action exists                      |
| `OFFBOARD` and unknown states                                                         | `MAX_ACTION_VALUE`    | PX4 will not inject an automatic DAA mode change   |

Manual modes are intentionally treated as `LAND_MODE`.
That means DAA will not automatically switch a manually flown vehicle into Hold, Return, or Land; only `Terminate` is considered a stronger action than those modes.

Action behavior:

> - DAA only sends an automatic action when the requested action is more severe than the current navigator state.

Reviewer: Do you mean?

```suggestion
- DAA only triggers an automatic action when the requested action is to change to "a more severe mode" than the current navigator state.
```

Is that also true of warnings? i.e. Might you still get a warning even if the action isn't great enough to justify changing navigation state?

Author: Indeed, updated and clarified the warning part: 

- _DAA only triggers an automatic action when the requested action is to change to "a more severe mode" than the current navigator state._
- _Warnings are evaluated separately from automatic mode changes. A conflict configured as `Warn only` or stronger can still emit operator warnings and status messages even when DAA does not request a mode change because the current navigator state is already equivalent or more severe._

- DAA continues to publish status updates even when no automatic action is sent.
- Automatic actions are one-shot per conflict escalation.
  If the same conflict stays at the same level, DAA does not retry the same mode-change command.
- Conflict de-escalation is conservative.
  For example, DAA does not automatically resume the mission after a hold conflict is cleared.
- `OFFBOARD` is handled conservatively: DAA does not inject an automatic mode change there, so arming and operating procedures need to account for that.
- If the vehicle is landed, DAA warns instead of changing mode.

## Arming, Preflight, and Ground Behavior

> The commander health checks subscribe to `detect_and_avoid_most_urgent` while the vehicle is disarmed.

Reviewer: We should at least link to the message docs for the first time any topic/message appears. UP to you if you want to link to them after that.

Author: added links

On this page, parameters are described where their behavior matters: `NAV_TRAFF_*` in [Crosstrack Mode](#crosstrack-mode), `F34_LVL_*`, `DAA_LVL_*_ACT`, `DAA_EN_DFLT_VEL`, and `DAA_DFLT_VEL` in [F3442 Mode](#f3442-mode) and the [F3442 Volume Appendix](#f3442-volume-appendix), [DAA_NOTIF_STATE](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#DAA_NOTIF_STATE) in [Operator Messages](#operator-messages), [DAA_TRAFF_TOUT](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#DAA_TRAFF_TOUT) in [Traffic Inputs and Identification](#traffic-inputs-and-identification), and ownship ADS-B identification parameters in the same traffic-input section.

## Telemetry and Logging

The main DAA topics are:

- `detect_and_avoid`: the conflict assessment for each processed traffic report.
- `detect_and_avoid_most_urgent`: the current most urgent active conflict.
- `transponder_report`: raw traffic input to DAA.

`detect_and_avoid` and `detect_and_avoid_most_urgent` are logged by default.

These topics are useful for:

- Flight review
- Integration testing
- Preflight debugging
- Verifying conflict escalation and action selection

## Operator Messages

> DAA emits MAVLink log messages for the operator in addition to publishing the uORB topics above.

Reviewer: MAVLink log messages? What messages are these sent in?

Author: clarified: 

_DAA emits PX4 [`mavlink_log`](../msg_docs/MavlinkLog.md) records for the operator in addition to publishing the uORB topics above. The MAVLink module forwards those records on its `STATUSTEXT` stream as MAVLink [`STATUSTEXT`](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#STATUSTEXT) messages to connected ground stations. Most DAA operator notifications are also sent through the PX4 [Events Interface](../concept/events_interface.md)._
